♪ ♪
>> During the summer, my uncle
asked me if I wanted to go,
like, learn the job
that he was doing.
My mom wanted me to go so
that I can see how hard it is
to work out in the sun.
What they did was, like,
just started a house
from the bottom to the top.
I always like working with my
hands or just,
like, learning new things.
♪ ♪
Then that day that we were
heading back, I was on my phone.
And, Hector, he starts saying
that, "Nah, there's...
the cops are coming."
(chatter on police radio)
So, my uncle pulls over,
and all he tells us is,
"Just relax, nothing's wrong."
(chatter on police radio)
The cop came, started asking
for our papers,
if we had any identification,
everything.
>> POLICE OFFICER:
>> Yeah.
>> He took me, out he made me
talk to Border Patrol.
>> BORDER PATROL AND MARTIN:
>> BORDER PATROL:
>> MARTIN:
We were all handcuffed.
And I started asking the cops,
like, "What's happening,
what are they going
to do to us?"
And he just told us that we
weren't supposed to be here,
and because we were illegal,
Border Patrol was going
to come get us.
As soon as I was in the back
of the car,
I-I just felt like everything
was over.
♪ ♪
>> DAFFODIL ALTAN:
That night in June 2019
was the beginning of a long
journey for Martin.
It would land him hundreds of
miles from home.
>> Have you ever been to a
stadium?
It was like a stadium but with
cages inside,
and that's where they kept
all the people.
And when we walked in there, we
just saw people, it's like,
crying, we saw little kids
crying.
They put me in the cage.
I was with around
12 other younger minors.
I didn't really know what
to think, I was like,
"Is this prison,
or, like, what is this?"
I kind of broke down.
I didn't know what to do.
>> ALTAN: He had ended up
in a massive
U.S. Border Patrol holding pen
in McAllen, Texas.
>> A bleak picture of conditions
for migrant children.
>> We are seeing sick children,
we are seeing dirty children,
we are seeing hungry children...
>> ...say there is not enough
food, water, or sanitation.
>> ALTAN: Martin had spent most
of his life
in the U.S.,
but it didn't matter.
Like tens of thousands of kids
who had recently crossed
the border on their own,
or had been separated
from their parents,
he was handed over to
a federal agency,
the Department of Health
and Human Services.
>> MARTHA MENDOZA: When a child
arrives at the U.S. border,
they are taken into custody
by U.S. Customs and Border
Protection,
whose mission is to protect the
security of the United States.
They're not set up to take care
of anybody.
They then turn that child over
to the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services,
which is an agency whose mission
is to take care of people.
♪ ♪
>> ALTAN: I've been reporting
on the lives
of undocumented people in
America for the past decade.
>> These kids are getting sent
all around the country...
>> ALTAN:
With the Associated Press,
we've been investigating HHS's
detention system
for migrant children.
>> GARANCE BURKE: We're going
to end up with sort of like
a generation of migrant kids
who are going to have
this kind of lasting trauma.
>> ALTAN: My partners
at the A.P.,
investigative reporters Garance
Burke and Martha Mendoza,
have been on this story
for years.
They obtained confidential
HHS data
showing where migrant children
are being held
and how many of them are in
detention at any given time.
>> BURKE: What we found in our
reporting
is that never before had there
been this many children
held inside the government's
network of shelters
for migrant kids.
The majority of those kids were
in facilities
with more than 100
or 1,000 other children,
so mass facilities where,
psychiatrists say,
kids start to feel like
just another number.
>> ALTAN: HHS's own numbers now
show that over the past year,
nearly 70,000 migrant children
have been held
without their parents-- more
than any other time on record--
and more than any other country
in the world.
♪ ♪
One of HHS's largest facilities
is an emergency influx shelter
in Homestead, Florida.
That's where Martin ended up
in June 2019.
At the time, nearly one out of
every five migrant kids
in HHS custody
was being held there.
>> When we arrived there,
you could just see
there was a couple of guards,
armed guards, by the entrance.
Once we went inside,
we saw kids playing outside,
there was kids playing soccer.
In my head, what I was thinking
was, like,
"This was a way better place
than where I was,
in Immigration."
But this place
is not really home,
so I didn't really feel safe
at the same time.
>> ALTAN: There were more than
2,000 teenagers
being held at Homestead.
>> With very high numbers
of children
coming across the border
at times,
HHS has to be able to meet
its responsibility,
both legally and morally,
to have a place
for these children to go.
And I would say that, you know,
even one of our influx shelters
is better than a CBP
processing center.
>> ALTAN: Jonathan Hayes
is the director
of the Office of Refugee
Resettlement,
which is legally required to
care for migrant children
within HHS.
He sat down with the A.P.'s
Garance Burke.
>> BURKE: So, why would your
agency hold
so many children together,
both in influx shelters
and just very large shelters?
>> There were some periods where
we were receiving
400 to 500 kids every day.
You know, you-you may look at a,
at a shelter with 500 kids,
and realize, "I could fill up
one of those in one day,
potentially."
>> ALTAN: HHS would not allow us
to bring cameras
inside Homestead, despite
repeated requests.
But over the past year,
we've spoken to numerous kids
who've been detained--
including this girl,
who says spent a month
and a half inside Homestead
waiting to be reunited
with her father.
She asked us to disguise
her voice out of concerns
for her immigration status.
>> GIRL (speaking Spanish):
>> ALTAN: She says most of the
day was spent in classrooms,
with only one hour
of outdoor time.
>> ALTAN: The mass detention of
children at Homestead
and other HHS sites stems
in part
from a little-known decision by
the Trump administration.
In 2018 HHS started doing
extensive background checks
on the children's sponsors,
mostly relatives
trying to claim them
from detention.
>> MENDOZA: They began vetting
sponsors and families
to the extreme.
Anybody in a house where these
kids were going to go to
would have to be fingerprinted,
background checked,
and fully screened,
which took a long time.
>> ALTAN: While the extreme
vetting was in effect,
the time kids were spending in
HHS shelters
went from a few weeks to months.
>> Some of the additional
changes that did come to be,
I think did have an impact
on kind of slowing down
the, you know, the process in
that.
But, you know, it's always
a balance between,
you know, the safety
of the children,
but also being able to discharge
them as quickly
but as safely as possible.
♪ ♪
>> ALTAN: In Florida
this past summer,
we met a woman who had been
trying to get her nephew
out of Homestead.
>> XIOMARA (speaking Spanish):
>> ALTAN: Xiomara says her
16-year-old nephew Jarin
left Honduras because gangs
were trying to recruit him.
>> ALTAN: Though she herself is
undocumented,
Xiomara says she gave HHS
everything they asked for,
but Jarin had been in detention
for almost four months.
♪ ♪
>> ALTAN:
>> XIOMARA:
>> ALTAN: Along with the extreme
vetting,
we found there was another
factor pushing up the number
of kids in detention:
HHS was sharing information
with ICE
about sponsors coming to claim
their children.
>> What it was meant to do was
to cast a larger net
after those that could be
particularly targeted
for apprehensions.
>> ALTAN: Andrew Lorenzen Strait
was a deputy assistant director
of ICE at the time.
In May 2018 he helped write
the agreement
between the two agencies.
>> I thought we were going to be
looking at how we care for kids
that may have these issues of
being taken advantage of--
trafficked, smuggled.
>> ALTAN: Instead,
ICE used the information
to apprehend sponsors.
In the months following
the agreement,
the agency says around
330 people were arrested.
>> There is a total chilling
effect of coming forward,
because they believe they are
going to be picked up by ICE.
The outcomes of that partnership
were devastating
to the migrant community.
>> BURKE: In some of the
government paperwork I've seen,
there are fewer sponsors
coming forward now,
and that that's led to more
children being in custody.
>> I have absolutely heard some
anecdotal conversations
and comments, you know,
that there, you know,
there was some examples of
sponsors that were concerned.
However, I-I really reject, you
know, the-the very premise
that there's this very
widespread pattern.
>> ALTAN: ICE says it's not
arresting people
in this way anymore.
But the fear remains.
At her home in Texas, Martin's
mother was worried
about being arrested as she
searched for her son.
>> WOMAN:
>> ALTAN: Martin was born in
Mexico
and brought to the U.S. when he
was nine months old.
>> WOMAN:
>> ALTAN: But even undocumented
kids like him,
who've been here most of their
lives, have been detained.
>> WOMAN:
>> ALTAN: As more children
were being held,
and for longer times,
we began hearing from human
rights advocates
and mental health experts
who'd been inside Homestead.
>> Never have I ever been
to a facility
that has 2,000-plus children
in one place.
It's a, it's a deeply
unnatural state.
We've been monitoring facilities
all over the...
>> ALTAN: Neha Desai is part
of a group of attorneys
who monitor the conditions for
migrant children
inside detention facilities.
>> That are deteriorating...
What we know from decades and
decades of research
is the way we should treat
these kids
is in the most homelike setting,
in the least restrictive setting
possible.
Children at Homestead are
monitored 24-seven
by security guards.
Children tell me that
they can't walk five feet
to go to the bathroom
by themselves.
These children are not free
to leave.
>> ALTAN: Psychologist Yenys
Castillo was brought
into Homestead to assess
the impact of detention.
>> All of the children in
Homestead said,
"We are prisoners;
we're detained;
we cannot leave."
It was a very regimented place.
Children were walking,
and there was this one child,
and he was crying.
So, I asked the children,
"How come I saw a child crying,
and nobody was addressing
that child?"
And they said that they were not
allowed to talk to one another
most of the time,
and then they're not allowed
to touch one another,
and they're not allowed
to offer comfort.
So, we tend to see teenagers
as mini-adults.
They're not adults.
They cannot regulate
their own emotions.
They don't think of the future
as we do.
They think, "This is going
to last forever."
The longer they stay in these
detention conditions,
the more they deteriorate
psychologically.
>> GIRL:
>> ALTAN:
>> ALTAN AND GIRL:
>> GIRL:
>> The security around any of
our shelters
is more to keep people out
than to keep people in.
Especially with some of the
older children, you know,
these aren't secure facilities
that are impossible
to get out of.
The overwhelming majority,
the near-unanimous number
of children in our care,
are grateful.
>> ALTAN: There are now
approximately
170 HHS shelter programs
for migrant kids
across the country, from small
foster-care sites
to places like Homestead.
HHS houses the youngest
migrants, infants and toddlers,
in a handful of facilities they
call "tender-age" shelters.
We were recently given rare
access to this shelter
holding babies and teenage
mothers in San Benito, Texas.
>> This is our busy hallway.
There's constantly children
playing, nursing, eating.
>> ALTAN: Melissa Aguilar is the
director of shelter programs
for Comprehensive
Health Services,
a private company
that runs the shelter.
>> We focus on zero to 17.
So, we have mothers in care.
We have the capacity to service
pregnant teenagers,
and they can also care
for their babies here.
A staff said it earlier today,
and she said it best,
that "the children
are borrowed."
They're borrowed for-for
our purpose, right?
So, a lot of times,
when something is borrowed,
you take care of them better
than you would
something that is your own.
>> ALTAN: The company runs five
other shelters,
including Homestead.
And among its leadership is
former White House Chief
of Staff John Kelly,
who'd backed the policy
of separating kids
from their families
at the border.
Over the past year, the
government has paid CHS
nearly $300 million.
By its very definition,
when you're for-profit,
your job as a company
is to make a profit.
So, some people might say, then,
isn't there then an incentive
to detain kids?
>> There is a profit,
there is a price incentive,
but it's not a detention
incentive.
The-the question about is there
incentive to detain children--
absolutely not.
And I think that it's so
important for everybody
to understand that we're not
detaining children.
We're not separating children.
We're caring for children.
>> BURKE: Morally, ethically, is
it okay for a for-profit company
to make money from holding
children in mass facilities
that they cannot leave?
>> They're not the ones
determining
what kids are coming there,
they don't really have as much
say over who stays there.
We can move kids in an out
if we so desire.
Am I personally opposed to, you
know, a for-profit company?
I've thought about that
question, and honestly, I'm not.
And at the end of the day,
when you get down
at the shelter level, you know,
you're basically talking about
just a bunch of social workers,
child-welfare experts,
who just want to help care
for the kids.
>> We know from the American
Academy of Pediatrics
that there's no amount of time
that it's safe for children
to be detained.
We know definitively that
detention harms children.
That every single day that
children are there,
those impacts compound.
>> ALTAN: Recently, HHS's
internal investigator
looked into the issue.
>> MENDOZA: They took a look
at the shelter system
and concluded
in their own report
that the mental-health needs of
these kids was not being met.
Some kids were getting stressed
out to the extreme,
inflicting self-harm,
becoming extremely withdrawn
and depressed.
>> ALTAN: Beyond the
mental-health impacts,
there have also been documented
cases
of physical and sexual abuse
at some HHS shelters--
and the A.P. reported
that children and families
are now suing the U.S. for
hundreds of millions of dollars.
♪ ♪
As for Martin, after almost
three weeks in detention,
he found out he would finally be
going home.
>> On a Saturday night,
I was going to sleep,
and they woke me up, like,
around 10:00, 10:30.
And they're like,
"You're getting to leave."
>> WOMAN:
>> When I saw them, I just,
like, ran to her
and got to hug her.
I just stared at them,
didn't know what to do.
Before I didn't really,
like, miss my mom,
'cause I got to see her
every day.
I didn't feel like there would
be that empty space
where you actually need
that hug from your mom.
The first two weeks,
I-I didn't really get to sleep.
I was still, like, confused
about what was happening.
I wasn't really stable.
I'm still scared that something
bad could happen.
Like, I don't feel safe anymore.
♪ ♪
>> XIOMARA:
>> ALTAN: After nearly
four months,
Xiomara was finally recognized
as Jarin's aunt by HHS.
>> JARIN:
>> XIOMARA:
>> WOMAN (on phone):
♪ ♪
>> XIOMARA:
(people speaking Spanish
in background)
>> JARIN:
(applause)
>> Your conscious mind
may not remember,
but your body remembers.
Your brain remembers.
And maybe that child, at that
moment, says, "I'm okay."
But later on he might be in
a situation that is scary,
and then he might freeze.
And he doesn't know why.
♪ ♪
>> ALTAN: We visited Martin two
months after he came home.
He and his family asked to see
the footage
of the moment when
he was first detained.
>> (on recording): Listen,
I'm at a check-and-stop
here in Texas.
I got six subjects, one of
them's got a New York state...
>> ALTAN: Were you surprised
when they got
the Border Patrol on the phone?
>> Yes.
I just didn't know, like, what
to say or how to react.
(police chatter on recording)
>> ALTAN:
>> No, it's okay.
>> ALTAN: Okay.
>> It's just... constant thing
I wish, like, it never happened.
>> ALTAN: Mm-hmm.
♪ ♪
(police chatter on radio)
>> For more on this and other
"Frontline" programs,
visit our website at
pbs.org/frontline.
♪ ♪
"Frontline's"
"Kids Caught in the Crackdown"
and "Iraq's Secret Sex Trade"
are available
on Amazon Prime Video.
♪ ♪